# READING 22. INTRODUCTION TO FIXED-INCOME PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT

The candidate should be able to:

## a discuss roles of fixed-income securities in portfolios;

Provide portfolio diversification with generally low correlation to equity.
Provide regular cash flow.
Floating-rate and inflation-indexed bonds provide forms of inflation protection.

## b describe how fixed-income mandates may be classified and compare features of the mandates;

Liability-based mandates dedicate portfolio assets and reinvest future cash flows to fund future liabilities:
- Cash-flow matching funds liabilities with coupon and par amounts received on the dates the liabilities are paid.
- Duration matching (immunization) matches asset and liability duration to achieve comparable results. Both are forms of immunization. Duration matching generally gives more flexibility in asset selection and therefore may meet the objective at a lower cost.
- Horizon matching is a hybrid of cash-flow matching nearer term liabilities and duration matching the longer-term liabilities.
- Contingent immunization is a hybrid of active management with potential immunization. The portfolio must initially be overfunded and can be actively managed. If successful (unsuccessful), the surplus will grow (be lost) and the ultimate cost will end up being lower (higher) than from immunization.


|                    |Initial funding required PVA  |Risk and complexity       | Expected realized return if successful|
|--------------------|------------------------------|---------------------------|--------------------------------------|
|Cash flow matching  | 3                            | 1 - lowest                |1-lowest                              |
|Horizon    matching | 2                            | 2                         |2                                     |
|Duration matching   | 1 - lowest                   | 3                         |3                                     |
|Contingent immunization  | 4-Highes                | 4-Highest                |4-Highest                             |

Total return mandates typically seek to match or exceed the return of a benchmark index:
- Pure indexing exactly matches the holdings of the index.
- Enhanced indexing allows modest deviations (but matches duration to control interest rate risk).
- Active management does not restrict deviations versus the index.

## c describe bond market liquidity, including the differences among market sub-sectors, and discuss the effect of liquidity on fixed-income portfolio management;
Liquidity in the bond market (ability to buy or sell on a timely basis at or near fair market value) is substantially lower than in equity markets.
- Most bonds do not trade or trade infrequently after issuance.
- The sheer number and variety of individual bond issues is immense.
- The market is mostly over-the-counter with trade price and volume not reported.
- Liquidity is highest for sovereign government, higher-quality, and most recently issued (on-the-run) bonds.
- Smaller issues are generally less liquid.

Effects:
- Bond pricing data is more difficult to obtain.
  - matrix pricing: infer based on YTM of others
  - prepay features, difficult to obtain YTM
- Portfolio managers have to choose between more liquid bonds or less liquid bonds that may offer a liquidity premium.
  - Buy and hold investors: prefer less liquid for higher yield
  - Active investors: active strategy will compensate lower yield
- Dealer will widen the bid-ask spread
- Derivatives and ETFs are generally more liquid and an alternative to direct investment in bonds.

## d describe and interpret a model for fixed-income returns;

Return can be projected (or actual return decomposed) as the sum of:
1. Yield income: annual coupon amount / current bond price
2. Rolldown return, assuming no change in yield curve: (projected ending bond price

(BP) − beginning BP) / beginning BP

3. Price change due to investor yield change predictions: (–MD × ΔY) + (½C × ΔY2)
4. Less credit losses: predicted default adjusted for recover rate
5. Currency G/L: projected change in value of foreign currencies weighted for exposure to the currency

Yield income + rolldown return may be referred to as rolling yield

## e discuss the use of leverage, alternative methods for leveraging, and risks that leverage creates in fixed-income portfolios;

Leveraged portfolio return can be calculated as rI + [(VB / VE) × (rI − rB)].

If rI exceeds (is below) rB, the leverage enhances (reduces) portfolio return.

Repurchase agreements (and securities lending), futures contracts, swaps, and structured investments can all be used to leverage return.

In addition to the detrimental effects if rI is less than rB, the lender of the funds can demand repayment, forcing liquidation of portfolio assets at fire sale prices, which can feed a financial crisis.


Derivatives or borrowing are explicit forms of leverage. Other forms of leverage, such as the use of structured financial instruments, are more implicit.
- Futures contracts
  - Futures contract's notional value= current value of underlying asset X multiplier
  - Leverage_futures= (notional value - margin)/margin
- Swap agreement
  - Fixed-rate payer: short a fixed-rate bond + long a floating-rate bond → i↗  →  value↗
  - Fixed-rate receiver: long a fixed-rate bond + short a floating-rate bond  → i↘  →  value↗
  - Equivalent to a long-short bond portfolio: provide leveraged exposure to bonds
- Structured financial instruments (structured products)
  - Inverse floating-rate note (inverse floater)
    - Coupon rate = C – L x R
    - Strong view that interest rates will remain low or possibly
- Repurchase agreements (repos)
  - Important source of short-term financing
  - Repos are effectively collateralized loans
  - Repo rate: interest rate on a repurchase agreement
  - Dollar interest=principal amount × repo rate  ×  term of repo in days/360
- Securities lending
  - Short sales: sale of securities the seller does not own
  - Financing-motivated security loan: a bond owner lends the bond to another investor in exchange for cash
  - Unlike repos, securities lending transactions are typically open ended. Lender may recall the securities at any time, forcing the
borrower to deliver the bonds by buying them back or borrowing from another lender. The securities lender earns the interest on that collateral. If those earnings are higher than the fair compensation for the securities lent, a portion might be rebated to the securities borrower. The rebate rate equals:

Rebate rate = collateral earnings rate − security lending rate

#### Risk of leverage
Leverage alters the risk-return properties of an investment portfolio. A heavily leveraged portfolio may incur significant losses even when portfolio assets suffer only moderate valuation declines.
- Leverage can lead to ***forced liquidations***. If the value of the portfolio decreases, the portfolio's equity relative to borrowing levels is reduced and the portfolio’s leverage increases. Portfolio assets may be sold in order to pay off borrowing and reduce leverage.
- If portfolio assets are not liquidated, then the overall leverage increases, corresponding to ***higher levels of risk***.
- Decreases in portfolio value can lead to forced liquidations even if market conditions are unfavorable for selling-for example, during crisis periods. The term ***“fire sale"*** refers to forced liquidations at prices that are below fair value as a result of the seller’s need for immediate liquidation

## f discuss differences in managing fixed-income portfolios for taxable and tax exempt investors.

Taxes complicate portfolio management as managers seeking to maximize return must consider the different tax effects of each portfolio decision.

#READING 23. LIABILITY-DRIVEN AND INDEX-BASED STRATEGIES

The candidate should be able to:

## a describe liability-driven investing;

Liability-driven investing is a form of asset-liability management (ALM) that manages the assets in relation to the characteristics of the liabilities. This is easier when the future liability payouts are known in amount and timing. The liabilities are essentially the benchmark for making decisions.

Asset-driven investing is a less common form of ALM and adjusts the liabilities in relation to the characteristics of the assets.

## b evaluate strategies for managing a single liability;

Immunization can be used to fund liabilities with a high degree of certainty. The assets are dedicated to this purpose and all cash flows are reinvested until needed for payout.
- Cash flow matching is without risk, assuming there are no defaults. Bonds are bought and held in sufficient amount and pay date to meet the liabilities. It is the most restrictive strategy, and so typically costs more (has lowest return).
- Duration matching achieves similar results, but is less restrictive in the assets selected. Matching Macaulay duration of the assets to liabilities balances the exposure between price and reinvestment risk. Duration and other portfolio statistics should be based on portfolio yield (IRR). To immunize a single-period liability:
- Initial PVA equals (or exceeds) PVL. (There are exceptions to this for more complex situations where initial portfolio IRR differs from initial discount rate of the liability.)
- Match Macaulay durations (DA = DL).
- Minimize portfolio convexity.
- Rebalance the portfolio to maintain the duration match.

Immunization (duration matching) issues include the following:
- The assets have greater convexity than the single date liability; therefore, the portfolio benefits from large parallel shifts but is at risk from curve twists (nonparallel shifts). Minimizing convexity minimizes this structural risk.
- Immunization can be interpreted as zero replication, meaning a successful immunization will replicate the price and yield path of a zero-coupon bond that could have been used for a perfect cash flow match immunization.

## c compare strategies for a single liability and for multiple liabilities, including alternative means of implementation;

Multiple liabilities can be cash flow matched with a portfolio of zero-coupon bonds or coupon-bearing bonds whose cash flows (P&I) most closely match the liability payouts.
Duration matching can be done by matching the BPV of the assets and liabilities. The rules are as follows:
1. Initial PVA equals (or exceeds) PVL (see the caveat given under single liability rules).
2. BPVA = BPVL
3. Asset dispersion of cash flows and convexity exceed those of the liabilities. (But not by too much, in order to minimize structural risk exposure to curve reshaping).
4. Regularly rebalance the portfolio to maintain the BPV match.

Derivatives are often used to adjust the BPV of the assets and hedge or partially hedge the duration gap:
- Buying (selling) futures or receive (pay) fixed swaps increases (decreases) asset duration and BPV.
- Futures BPV ≈ BPVCTD / CFCTD
  - BPV = MD × V × 0.0001
- Nf = (BPV of liability − BPV of current portfolio) / BPV of futures.
- NP for swap = (BPV of liability − BPV of current portfolio) / BPV of 1 NP for the swap.
  - BPVswap is the difference in BPV of fixed and floating side.

Contingent immunization (CI) requires the portfolio be overfunded with a positive surplus (PVA > PVL). If the surplus is positive, the portfolio can be actively managed (not immunized):
- If active management is successful, the return will exceed the initially available immunization rate, the surplus will grow, and ultimate cost of the strategy will be less than immunizing.
- If active management fails, the surplus will decline to zero and the portfolio must be immunized. The ultimate cost will exceed that of immunizing.

## d evaluate liability-based strategies under various interest rate scenarios and select a strategy to achieve a portfolio’s objectives;


| Instrument                                                                 | Premium cost| SFR: <2.5%            | 2.5<SFR<3.3%             | SFR>3.3%     |
|----------------                                                                 |    ----------------|---------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------|
|2.5% receive fixed swap                                          |              None|Optimal                    |Negative                           |Negative         |
|2.3% receive fixed swaption                                   |               75bp|Initial cost                 |Negative, Upfront cost  |Optimal             |
|colloar:2.3% receive fixed -3.3% payer swaption|               75bp|receive 2.3% is low|Optimal                            | payer negative|                  

A 100% hedge eliminates the duration gap (matches BPV of assets and liabilities). In the normal scenario of BPVA < BPVL, a manager who expects interest rates to:
- Increase will reduce the hedge size, leaving the BPV of assets less than of a fully hedged duration gap. Leaving the BPV of assets at a lower level means they will decline in value less as interest rates increase.
- Decrease will increase the hedge size, increasing the BPV of assets above that of a fully hedged duration gap. Increasing the BPV of assets means they will increase in value more as interest rates decrease.

Regarding the three swap methods of reducing a negative duration gap (increase BPV of assets): 
- Entering a receive-fixed swap is generally optimal if interest rates in the future are below the swap’s SFR.
- Using a zero-cost collar (buy receiver swaption and sell payer swaption) is generally optimal if interest rates in the future are moderately higher (i.e., between the swap and payer swaption SFRs).
- Buying a receiver swaption is generally optimal if interest rates in the future exceed the payer swaption SFR by some amount.

## e explain risks associated with managing a portfolio against a liability structure;

Risks include:
- Hedge amounts are approximations based on assumed durations and ignore convexity.
- Duration assumes parallel shifts in the curve.
- Twists in the yield curve can create structural risk (risk due to curve reshaping).
- Multiple assumptions (model risk) are required to model the characteristics of complex liabilities, such as those in DB plans.
- Measurement error issues occur when weighted average characteristics are used instead of portfolio statistics based on portfolio yield (IRR).
- Futures base calculations are approximations based on an assumed CTD bond, and that CTD can change.
- Spread risk exists if the relationship between asset yield and liability discount rate changes.
- Traditionally, OTC derivatives have counterparty risk.
- Cash flow risk for exchange-traded and OTC derivatives requiring cash settlement of gain/loss or margin.
- Asset liquidity risk if positions cannot be quickly adjusted at near fair market value.

## f discuss bond indexes and the challenges of managing a fixed-income portfolio to mimic the characteristics of a bond index;

Bond index funds offer low cost diversification. Their goal is to minimize tracking error. But there are challenges (compared to equity):
- A much larger number of bond issues with diverse characteristics exists. This generally makes full replication impractical.
- Liquidity has declined post-2008, is often low, and varies by bond issue.
- Trading is OTC, and dealers have become less able to supply liquidity.
- Most individual bonds rarely trade, and price must be estimated based on matrix pricing.
- Bond index composition and characteristics can change.

Enhanced indexing matches the primary risk factors of the index. To minimize tracking error:
- Match modified duration—and effective duration if there are option features.
- Match key rate durations.
- Match weighting exposure to the various bond sectors, quality ratings, issuers, and all other material factors. Cell matching is a common technique used to do this.

## g compare alternative methods for establishing bond market exposure passively;

Passive bond market exposure can be achieved with:
- A separately managed account that replicates the index.
- Index mutual funds, either open ended or ETFs.
- Synthetic strategies, including:
  - Total return swaps, receiving a bond index return.
  - Futures or options based on bond instruments.

## h discuss criteria for selecting a benchmark and justify the selection of a benchmark;

Determine the client’s objectives and constraints before finalizing the strategic asset allocation. Then, select a bond index that matches the objectives and constraints as well as the desired asset class characteristics. Selecting a suitable index is complicated by:
- The possible decline in index duration as the bonds age.
- The changing characteristics of many indexes over time as the holdings change.
- The “bums problem” in value-weighted indexes as the largest issuers become a greater percentage of the index, but large issuance is often associated with increasing leverage and declining credit quality.

## i describe construction, benefits, limitations, and risk–return characteristics of a laddered bond portfolio.

Laddered portfolios:
- Provide diversification across the yield curve and natural liquidity as a portion of the bonds come due each year. In an upward sloping yield curve, this can also be desirable as each maturing bond is rolled over into the longest (and highest yielding) maturity used in the ladder.
- Have more convexity than a bullet portfolio because their cash flows are more distributed.
- Could be constructed with a sequence of target-date ETFs as an alternative to individual bonds.

# READING 24. YIELD CURVE STRATEGIES

The candidate should be able to:

## a describe major types of yield curve strategies;


Active Strategies When the (Upward Sloping) Yield Curve Is Expected to Be Stable
- Buy and hold — extend duration to get higher yields.
- Roll down the yield curve — portfolio weighting highest for securities at the long end of the steepest yield curve segments, maximizes price gains on securities from declines in yield as time passes.
- Carry trade — borrow at lower rates to purchase securities with higher rates.
- Sell convexity — reduce portfolio convexity to increase yield.

Active Strategies for Anticipated Changes in Yield Curve Level, Slope, or Curvature
- Duration management — increase (decrease) portfolio duration if rates are expected to decrease (increase).
- For nonparallel shifts in the curve — increase (decrease) portfolio exposure to key rate durations where relative decreases (increases) in key rates are expected.
- Buy convexity — increase portfolio convexity; decreases yield but improves price performance for larger changes in rates.
- Bullet and barbell structures — security durations are concentrated around portfolio duration (bullet) or concentrated at the ends of the yield curve (barbell). Barbells tend to have higher convexity but lower yield and tend to outperform if curvature increases.

==============Example===========================
Consider a portfolio with a benchmark that is laddered and has a duration of 10. The manager is considering three possible strategies:
1. Ladder: Match the benchmark which has an equal distribution of 1 to 19 duration bonds for portfolio duration of 10. The yield and convexity are 4.39% and 20.1 respectively.
2. Barbell: 50% in securities with a duration of 2 and 50% in securities with a duration of 18, for portfolio duration of 10. The yield and convexity are 4.30% and 24.7 respectively.
3. Bullet: 100% in securities with a duration of 10. The yield and convexity are 4.51% and 16.4 respectively.

A. State and justify the optimal strategy if the manager expects a small and very near term parallel upward shift in the yield curve.
B. State and justify the optimal strategy if the manager expects a large parallel and very near term upward shift in the yield curve.
C. State and justify the optimal strategy if the manager expects a large parallel downward shift in the yield curve over the next 12 months.
D. State and justify the optimal strategy if the manager expects an immediate steepening of the curve with short rates (duration of 1) decreasing 50 bp, no change in intermediate rates (duration of 10), and long rates (duration of 19) increasing 50 bp.
E. State and justify the optimal strategy if the manager expects an immediate steepening of the curve with short rates (duration of 1) decreasing 10 bp, intermediate rates (duration of 10) increasing 40 bp, and long rates (duration of 19) increasing 90 bp.
F. State and justify the optimal strategy if the manager expects an immediate flattening of the curve with short rates increasing 50 bp, no change in intermediate rates, and long rates decreasing 50 bp.

Answers:
A. There is no distinct advantage for any strategy. They all have the same duration and expected change in value for a parallel shift. The bullet has a yield advantage, but over a short time period
that will not matter much. The barbell has more convexity but for a small change in rates that will not matter much. The ladder more closely matches the portfolio benchmark’s duration distribution
but has no material expected return advantage in this scenario.

B. The barbell. With a large increase in interest rates, the higher convexity of the barbell will produce the greatest cushioning of price decline.

C. There is no distinct advantage for any strategy. There are conflicting issues. They all have the same duration. The bullet has a yield advantage over the next 12 months. The barbell has more convexity which will increase its value gain for a large decrease in rates. The ladder more closely matches the portfolio benchmark’s duration distribution but has no material expected return advantage in this scenario.

D. The bullet is best. With no change in intermediate rates, it will not decline in value. The others will decline in price. The manager has described a pivot in the curve. With long rates up 50 bp and
high duration there will be a large decline in value. The 50 bp decrease in shorter rates with less duration will not produce as large a value gain. Thus the barbell will decline the most and the
ladder will decline some.

E. The bullet is best for the same reasons it is best in part D. There is a steepening and that favors the bullet. There are also elements of a parallel upward shift, but all strategies have the same
duration and respond the same to a parallel shift, ignoring the small convexity effect.

F. The barbell because it has the most exposure to long duration assets where rates will decrease. This will give it the largest value gain.
==============end===========================


## b explain how to execute a carry trade;

## c explain why and how a fixed-income portfolio manager might choose to alter portfolio convexity;

## d formulate a portfolio positioning strategy given forward interest rates and an interest rate view;


Question: A manager calculates the implied forward rate to exist in one year for today’s 5-year bond to be 4.75%. That same 5-year bond yields 4.85% today and the 1-year bond today yields 3.5%. The manager’s opinion is that interest rates will increase and that in one year, 4-year bonds will yield 5.0%. Assume for simplicity all the bonds and interest rates are zero coupon, estimate the return that will be earned on the 5-year bond over the next year if the manager is correct.
A. 2.50%.
B. 4.00%.
C. 4.75%.

Answer: A. If implied forward rates occur, all bonds will earn the same return over the forward period being analyzed. In this case, that period is one year, so the return will equal the return of today’s one year bond (i.e., 3.5%). The manager projects the yield of today’s 5-year bond when it is a 4-year bond will be 5% and not the implied forward rate of 4.75. This 25 bp higher rate will reduce the bond’s return. It will then have a duration of approximately 4, so the return reduction is 25 × 4 =100 bp. That makes the projected return approximately 3.5 – 1.0 = 2.5%. 

## e explain how derivatives may be used to implement yield curve strategies;

## f evaluate a portfolio’s sensitivity to a change in curve slope using key rate durations of the portfolio and its benchmark;

## g discuss inter-market curve strategies;

## h construct a duration-neutral government bond portfolio to profit from a change in yield curve curvature;

## i evaluate the expected return and risks of a yield curve strategy.

5 sources:
  1. Interest income
  2. Price return -current yield curve
  3. Price return - forecasted yield curve
  4. FX changes
  5. Credit rating changes

# READING 25. FIXED-INCOME ACTIVE MANAGEMENT: CREDIT STRATEGIES

The candidate should be able to:

## a describe risk considerations in investment-grade and high-yield corporate bond portfolios;

Modified duration - interest rate sensitivity
Spread duration - spread sensitivity

For most bonds, MD and Ds are the same, except floating rate securities:
Given MD=0.25, Ds=9.1:
  - Rf up 20bp: P down 0.05%;
  - Spread up 20bp, P down 1.82%

Negative correlation between Rf and credit spread: 
Weak economy -> Rf down
             -> Prob of Default up -> Spread up

Effective Duration
Empirical Duration: regression of actual price and interest rate change

IG: more sensitive to IR risk
HY: more sensitive to Credit risk
but no absolute, in all cases

 ## b compare the use of credit spread measures in portfolio construction;

- Nominal spread, added to single YTMs:
  - G-spread: straight line interpolation of two closest maturity. can be used to hedge IR risk.
  - I-spread: SFR (more maturities / smoother YC, but not risk free). not used to hedge IR risk.

- Embedded options spread, added to on-the-spot rate curve:
  - Z-spread: Zero (IR) volatility spread. Trial and error add to spot rate (credit risk free). Not consider embedded option
  - OAS: assume IR volatility -> IR tree of possible forward rate -> future cash flow -> single spread trial and error. Expected average incremental return, simulated average result

Z-spread= Credit Risk + Liq Risk + Option Risk
OAS= Credit Risk + Liq Risk

Option-free: Z=OAS
Putable: Z < OAS
Callable: Z > OAS


EXR= s*t - ds*SD - t*PD*EL

Portfolio OAS = Sum (wi * OASi)

## c discuss bottom-up approaches to credit strategies;

## d discuss top-down approaches to credit strategies;

## e discuss liquidity risk in credit markets and how liquidity risk can be managed in a credit portfolio;

## f describe how to assess and manage tail risk in credit portfolios;

## g discuss considerations in constructing and managing portfolios across international credit markets;

## h describe the use of structured financial instruments as an alternative to corporate bonds in credit portfolios.

ABS
MBS,CMBS
CDO,CLO

Covered bonds : dual backing (collateral + general obligation), less risky
